Type of questions
Descriptive ? describe set of data.  Usually can not be generalize without additional analysis  -- US Census is an example.  NOT predictive no inferences
Google ngram viewer.  

Exploratory ? find relationships you didn?t know about but not confirm them ? not final say on a problem ? shouldn?t be used for generalization or predicting
Correlation does not imply causation. 

Brain images portions of brain that light up ?
Sloan digital sky survey ? data collected from night sky at different time to find new starts etc.  


Inferential ? take a small sample of a bigger population to infer something about population
Common from statistical analysis.  Make a generalization

predictive  - use data from some objects to predict values of another object.  
IF X PREDICTS Y it DOES NOT mean X causes Y
Depends heaviliy on measuring the correct variables
More data and simple models work well.  Very hard especially about future 
SEE references
Nate Silver fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com ? presidential predictions
Target used purchases to send here something about pregnancy

Causal ? Identify causes created by changing on variable.  Randomized studies are required to identify causation.  Generally identified on as ?on average?
Gold Standard.   Fecal treatment ? determined causal impact on making people better.

Mechanistic- understand exact changes in variables that lead to changes in other variables.
Very hard to do.  
Random component is data is measurement error.  May infer parameters if equations are now.  
Engineering and physical science applications


WHAT IS DATA ? Data are values of qualitative or quanitiative variables belonging to a set of items (population)

Variables are characteristics of an item or object.
Qualitative  - sex, treatment country of origin, 
Quantitiative ? numberic value ? range.

WHAT DO DATA LOOK LIKE???
Data can be raw text etc.
Data could be an API ? like twitter Rest APIs
https://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1/get/blocks/blocking

Medical Record.

VIDEO ? Audio  

Darwin Tunes site determining evolution of music.  http://www.pnas.org/content/109/30/12081.full
https://soundcloud.com/uncoolbob/sets/darwintunes

Access to files through API or spreadsheets

Rarely do data look clean and organization the way you?d want it to.

Second most important thing in Data science ? most important thing is the question you ask.

Data may limit the question that you ask.

Having data without a question doesn?t work.


BIG DATA

Different definitions ? 1.8 zeta bytes of data in 2011

?Big Data? depends on reference.

Big deal now because 
Can collect lots of data more cheaply ? 
IE Looking at 240 million people and 30 billion text sessions.
6.6. degrees of data

Big or Small ? you need the RIGHT Data.

Don?t use HADOOP ? you data isn?t that big HAHA

Data and an aching desire for answer does not provide an answer ? even with ?gigantic?, may not be able to answer the questions if the right data is not available.

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Why care.  Genomic signatures to guide the use of chemotherapeutics.
But design was flawed as was the statistical analysis.  Used bad predictions to decide on CHEM to be used.   Resulted in lawsuit.   Must be very careful about experimental design.

1. Care about the analysis plan.   What are key issues.
2. Have a plan for data and code sharing.

http://figshare.com -- for sharing larger amounts of data

Jeff Leek has a sharing plan

3. Formulate your question in advance.
a. Scientific discipline
4. Statistical inference ? using only a sample of full population.
5. Calculate descriptive statistics for the sample ?
6. Use inferential statistics to determine if this would play out in the same way in full population.

Big benefit where there is small variability between test samples and large difference between samples.

CONFOUNDING.  
	Show size --> Literacy   

Might be missing AGE -  

	Show side depends on Age, so very small size children have lower literacy.

Study found that countries with large chocolate consumption had more Nobel laureates but this might be do to other factors ? not just
Correlation is NOT Causation

Dealing with CONFOUNDERS.

Fix variable so it can?t be a CONFOUNDERS
Testing phrases and colors ? use both phrases with both colors (This is STRATEFYING.

Randomizing will help overcome CONFOUNDING variable.


PREDICTION.  Collect individuals that respond and did not respond to chem. Therapy.  Want to predict that for new person.

Prediction is more challenging than inference.  If populations cross or share much of the data then very difficult to tell the difference.
For prediction you need populations to be different with as little cross over as possible.

Prediction key quantities

Have a disease + 
Or not have ?

Test to see who has the disease  

Sensitiviy --> Pr(positive test | disease)
Specificity --> Pr( negative test | no disease
Positive Predictive Value --> Pr(disease | positive test)
Negative Predictive Value --> Pr()no disease | negative test)
Accuracy --> Pr(Correct outcomes.

Beware Data Dredging ? finding data that matches your hyposethis

SUMMARY 

GOOD EXPERIMENTS
Have replication
Measure variability 
Generalize to the problem you care about
Are Transparent. In code and data

Prediction is not inference




